Gimp Astrophotography Editing Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

by Dan Liddell

Based upon this page:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSxdHrO0zfU

Linux is assumed here. If you use Windows make the necesarry keystroke mappings.

If you use a smaller display, it can be hard to shrink the Gimp interface vertically at first. 
The tool palette on the left can be extended to the right a bit. After doing that (so that the 
tool stack is broader and shorter) you should be able to shrink the interface vertically.

Initially the test image from the tutorial is dark.

The creater of the video (Ruzeen Farsad) says that Gimp does not handle 5K pixel images very 
well, so images may either need to be reduced or saved at a lower resolution.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
123456789012345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890123456789012

1 . If needed, resize to 1920x1293 using cubic interpolation.                  
      Use Image > Scale. Saving a copy is probably a good idea.

2.  Colors > Levels. Select the right (white) Input Levels slider and move it to the left. 
      Don't go all the way to the left. OK this setting.
      
This setting is not cumulative (or, sticky), so if you set levels again, you get the original 
dialogue box settings all over again.
  
3. Do step 2 again using the right-most slider. Adjust so that you just begin to see the 
     nebula to appear. Click OK.
     
If you don't see the nebula, do it a third time until you just begin to see it.
     
4. In the layers palette at the right, name the layer something like "first levels".

5. In the Layers palette, right-click > Duplicate Layer.

6. Click the name of the duplite layer so it highlights. Rename the duplicate layer 
     "first adjustments".

7. With first adjustments layer still selected, select the  Colors > Curves tool.  
     Drag the curve up to make it look like a logarithmic curve that goes nearly to the 
     top of the graph. Click OK.

8. Colors > Levels. For the Input Levels slider, move the left cursor  to the right so the 
     black end of the spectrum is moved to the right. This removes the hazy cast of the 
     image. Click OK.
     
How much you remove is a matter of taste.

9. Windows > Dockable Dialogs > Histogram.

10. In the histogram dialogue box, change the histogram to RGB mode.
      For the test image, the red end of the spectrum is well below (to the left of) the 
      green and blue.
  
11. Colors > Levels. Select the Red channel. For the Input Levels, move the right-hand 
      slider of the spectrum until the red curve aligns better with the blue and green curves.
        
12. Right-click the layer > Duplicate Layer. Rename to "second adjustments".

13. Hide the first two layers by clicking the eyeballs.

14. Tools > Selection Tools > By Color Select. Set the Threshold to about 50.

15. Select a representative star by clicking with the cursor.

16. Select > Grow. Set to 2 px.

17. Ctrl+C, Ctrl+V. This creates a selection layer, but that's not editable.

18. Click the Create New Layer icon in the Layers palette.

19. Rename the layer "star mask".

This layer insulates the stars from other adjustments that would dull them.

20. Hide the star mask. Select the second adjustments layer, and move it above the 
      star mask.
  
21. Ctrl+Alt+click the star mask layer. (star mask objects should sparkle)
      This keystroke seems to be squirrely in Linux. So instead you can do this: 
      Right click thumbnail of the star mask layer > Alpha to selection.

22. With second adjustments selected, Layer > Mask > Add Layer Mask. 
       
      In the Add a Mask to the Layer dialogue box, choose Selection and
      Invert layer mask. Click Add. 
      This mask should be next to the second adjustments layer.
      The mask should be white.
  
23. Shift+Ctrl+A to deselect the image. (Select > None)

The mask allows a visible layer to show while protecting the stars. The holes in the mask allow 
the stars in the star mask to show through. So now we can edit the second adjustments layer 
without changing the stars that lie below it in the star mask layer.

24. Select the thumbnail of the second adjustments layer.

25. Colors > Curves. Do a shallower curve adjustment than previously. OK the dialog box.

26. Colors > Levels. Move the black slider to the right to restore the contrast.
       
Due to dithering in the stacking process, the edges of the picture can be a bit fuzzy. 
So, we're going to eliminate that.
       
27. Select the Rectangle Select tool and draw a box just inside the perimeter of 
      the image.

28. Image > Crop to Selection.

29. Ctrl+Shift+A to deselect.

30. Tools > Selection Tools > By Color Select.
      Use the Threshold of 50 as a baseline. Look for a section of the nebula that has about 
      average density and click it.
  
31. Select > Feather > 10 px. OK.

32. Ctrl+C > Ctrl+V. In the Layers palette, select Create New Layer.

33. Repeat steps 21 - 23 for the pasted layer so you can see through to the star mask.

34. Rename the pasted layer to "nebula adjustments".

35. Select the nebula adjustments layer and choose Colors > Curves.

36. Adjust the curve to make gentle S shape. Roughly two grids in, drag the curve down a little. 
      Roughly five grids in, drag the  curve up a little. Fiddle with this until the picture looks right.
       
37. Make the second adjustments layer visible.

38. Colors > Levels. Start by dragging the white Input levels slider down a bit. 
      May want to fiddle with the settings to get the right effect. Click OK.

39. In the layers palette, you can adjust the opacity of any layer to get a desired effect. 
        
This author went with 70% for the nebula adjustments layer in the first attempt.

Now we'll adjust the background color.

You could try to repeat steps 30-32 on a layer (possibly a new one). 
For the test image, this simply grabs too much of the image. 
So instead we'll raise the black level.

40. Make just the second adjustments layer visible.

41. Layer > New from Visible.

42. Make both the new layer and the nebula adjustments layer visible.

43. Select the new layer and rename it "background adjustments".

44. Colors > Levels. Move the black slider to the right. You can experiment 
      with the middle slider as well. Adjust until things look good. Click OK.
      
This can be a good time to adjust the opacity of the nebula adjustments 
layer.

45. Repeat steps 21-23 for the background adjustments layer.

46. Make all layers from the star mask up visible.

47. Layer > New from Visible. Rename this layer to "combined" and move it to the top of the 
      stack in the Layers palette.

This layer basically stores the state of edits thus far.

48. Select the nebula adjustments layer. Right-click > Duplicate layer.
      Rename to "neb. color adj".

49. Drag neb. color adj  to the stop of the stack. Keep it selected.

50. Colors > Saturation. Play with this value until it looks right. 
      Show and hide the layer to see the effect. 
      (For the tutorial, this author went with 1.2.)
      OK the dialog box.
  
Be aware that the Saturation value is not "sticky". So if you OK a value and re-open the 
Saturation dialogue box later for the same layer, your previous setting will not appear.  
(This seems like a bug.)

51. Adjust the opacity of the neb. color adj layer as needed. 
      (This author went with 50%.)

52. In the upper right of the interface, select the histogram view and select RGB.
        
In this author's session, the red end of the spectrum was skewed to the right.
This seems to be expected for the tutorial image because the nebula is mostly red.

Pretty much at any time, you can go to Colors > Brightness-Contrast to do an 
adjustment on a layer. You can also create a copy of a layer and  play with this.

53. Select the background adjustments layer, right click, and duplicate the layer.
      Move the new layer to the second from top. 
      Rename it "backgd contrast  adj". Leave this layer selected.
       
You can toggle this layer on and off to see the effect. It's going to be additive to the 
combined layer. You can choose to touch it up or simply delete it.

54. (Optional.) Select Colors > Brightness-Contrast and touch up the contrast a bit. 
       OK the dialogue box when happy.
       
If you don't really like or need the effect, you can simply delete the layer or just hide it.

55. Make the combined and neb. color adj layer visible. 
      If you plan to use backgd contrast adj, make it visible also.
      
56. Layer > New from Visible. Rename this layer to combined2 and move it
      to the top of the Layers palette stack. Keep the layer selected. 
       
You can switch off the visibility of layers other than combined2.
       
57. Filters > Enhance > Noise Reduction.
      By default, the setting is 4 and it is automatically applied. 
        
That setting seems to be satisfactory for where we're at with the tutorial.
Noise reduction softens the image, and you can lose some of the dimmer stars.

58. Move the neb. color adj layer to the top of the layer stack. 
      Make it visible.

59. Make a copy of the background adjustments layer and move it above 
      the combined2 layer and make it visible.
       
60. Adjust the opacity of the copy of the background adjustments layer copy.
      (This author chose 50%.) Keep this layer selected.

61. In the Layers palette, change the mode to Luma lighten only. 
      This allows the noise reduction without losing as many stars.
        
62. Repeat the previous step for the neb. color adj layer.

You may want to increase the opacity of the neb. color adj layer. 
This author chose a value of 60%, but it's a matter of taste.

63. Make the top three layers visible and do Layer > New from Visible.
      Rename to combined3. 

64. Move the star mask layer to the second in the stack.
      Make it visible.

65. Apply steps 21 through 23 to the combined3 layer.
      Make this the active layer (not the mask).

66. Select Colors > Levels.
      Bring the white end of the Input Levels down a bit.
      OK the dialogue box.

67. For the combined3 layer, right-click > Duplicate Layer.

68. Select the mask on the duplicate layer, right-click > Delete Layer Mask.
      Rename the new layer to contrast.
      Make this the active layer.

69. Repeat step 36, only this time make a deeper S shape.
      Colors > Curves ...
      OK the dialogue box.

70. Select Colors > Brightness-Contrast.
      Bring the contrast up a bit.
      OK the dialogue box.

71. Select Layer > Mask > Add Layer Mask
      Select Black (full transparency).
      Make sure it isn't inverted.

72. Choose the paintbrush tool.
      Set Size 50.
      Set Hardness 5.
      Set Force about 15.
      Select the white color from the color selector and bring it to the foreground.

73. Paint over regions you want to highlight.
      Adjust the Opacity down and feather things in. 
      May want to play with the Force some more as well.

74. With the contrast layer mask selected, select Filters > Blur > Gaussian Blur.
      Make the Size X value about 20.
      This will bring up Size Y as well because they are locked by default.

75. Make the contrast layer active, not the mask.

You can now change the opacity of this layer.
This is done with Mode Normal in the Layers palette, or you can change the 
mode to Multiply.

76. Mode > Multiply and set the Opacity to about 20.

77. With the top 3 layers visible, Layer > New from Visible.
      Layer > Transform > Rotate 180.

You can now export this to whatever formats GIMP supports.


